task1-use-cases/subtask1-1-onboarding/README.md, before:

# Subtask 1.1: Onboarding Use Cases

This subtask focuses on defining use cases for participant onboarding processes in the WP4 Trust Infrastructure.

## Onboarding Participants

### Trust Service Providers (TSPs)
- **Registration Process**: Initial TSP registration
- **Certificate Submission**: TSP certificate submission and validation
- **Policy Compliance**: TSP policy compliance verification
- **Trust Mark Issuance**: Trust mark issuance and management

### Wallet Providers
- **Provider Registration**: Wallet provider registration process
- **Wallet Instance Attestation**: Wallet instance attestation and validation
- **Security Compliance**: Security compliance verification
- **Trust Establishment**: Trust establishment with infrastructure

### Relying Parties (RPs)
- **RP Registration**: Relying party registration process
- **Policy Acceptance**: RP policy acceptance and agreement
- **Certificate Validation**: RP certificate validation
- **Access Control Setup**: Access control configuration

### Certificate Authorities (CAs)
- **CA Registration**: Certificate authority registration
- **Root Certificate Submission**: Root certificate submission and validation
- **Policy Compliance**: CA policy compliance verification
- **Trust Anchor Establishment**: Trust anchor establishment

Commit message:

editorial: pid eaa provider onboarding

task1-use-cases/subtask1-1-onboarding/README.md, after:

# Subtask 1.1: Onboarding Use Cases

This subtask focuses on defining use cases for participant onboarding processes in the WP4 Trust Infrastructure.

## Onboarding Participants

### Trust Service Providers (TSPs)
- **Registration Process**: Initial TSP registration
- **Certificate Submission**: TSP certificate submission and validation
- **Policy Compliance**: TSP policy compliance verification
- **Trust Mark Issuance**: Trust mark issuance and management

### Wallet Providers
- **Provider Registration**: Wallet provider registration process
- **Wallet Instance Attestation**: Wallet instance attestation and validation
- **Security Compliance**: Security compliance verification
- **Trust Establishment**: Trust establishment with infrastructure

### Relying Parties (RPs)
- **RP Registration**: Relying party registration process
- **Policy Acceptance**: RP policy acceptance and agreement
- **Certificate Validation**: RP certificate validation
- **Access Control Setup**: Access control configuration

### PID Providers and Attestation Providers
- **Provider Registration**: PID / Attestation Provider registration process with National Registrar
- **Attestation Type Declaration**: Registration of attestation type(s) to be issued to Wallet Units
- **Access Certificate Issuance**: Access certificate issuance for authentication with Wallet Units
- **Registration Certificate Issuance**: Optional registration certificate issuance containing provider information
- **Trust Anchor Publication**: Trust anchor inclusion in Trusted Lists (for PID Providers, QEAA Providers, and PuB-EAA Providers)
- **Notification to Commission**: Notification to EU Commission and other Member States (for PID Providers and PuB-EAA Providers)

### Certificate Authorities (CAs)
- **CA Registration**: Certificate authority registration
- **Root Certificate Submission**: Root certificate submission and validation
- **Policy Compliance**: CA policy compliance verification
- **Trust Anchor Establishment**: Trust anchor establishment
