# ETSI TS 119 472-2 V1.1.1 (2025-12)

**Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI);**  
**Profiles for Electronic Attestation of Attributes;**  
**Part 2: Profiles for EAA/PID Presentations to Relying Party**

TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION

---

**Reference:** DTS/ESI-0019472-2  
**Keywords:** attribute attestation, digital identity, EUDI Wallet, trust services

---

**ETSI**  
650 Route des Lucioles  
F-06921 Sophia Antipolis Cedex - FRANCE  
Tel.: +33 4 92 94 42 00 Fax: +33 4 93 65 47 16  
Siret N° 348 623 562 00017 - APE 7112B  
Association à but non lucratif enregistrée à la Sous-Préfecture de Grasse (06) N° w061004871

---

## Important notice

The present document can be downloaded from the ETSI Search & Browse Standards application.

The present document may be made available in electronic versions and/or in print. The content of any electronic and/or print versions of the present document shall not be modified without the prior written authorization of ETSI. In case of any existing or perceived difference in contents between such versions and/or in print, the prevailing version of an ETSI deliverable is the one made publicly available in PDF format on ETSI deliver repository.

Users should be aware that the present document may be revised or have its status changed; this information is available in the Milestones listing.

If you find errors in the present document, please send your comments to the relevant service listed under Committee Support Staff.

If you find a security vulnerability in the present document, please report it through our Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure (CVD) program.

### Notice of disclaimer & limitation of liability

The information provided in the present deliverable is directed solely to professionals who have the appropriate degree of experience to understand and interpret its content in accordance with generally accepted engineering or other professional standard and applicable regulations.

No recommendation as to products and services or vendors is made or should be implied. No representation or warranty is made that this deliverable is technically accurate or sufficient or conforms to any law and/or governmental rule and/or regulation and further, no representation or warranty is made of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose or against infringement of intellectual property rights. In no event shall ETSI be held liable for loss of profits or any other incidental or consequential damages.

Any software contained in this deliverable is provided "AS IS" with no warranties, express or implied, including but not limited to, the warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose and non-infringement of intellectual property rights and ETSI shall not be held liable in any event for any damages whatsoever (including, without limitation, damages for loss of profits, business interruption, loss of information, or any other pecuniary loss) arising out of or related to the use of or inability to use the software.

### Copyright Notification

No part may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and microfilm except as authorized by written permission of ETSI. The content of the PDF version shall not be modified without the written authorization of ETSI. The copyright and the foregoing restriction extend to reproduction in all media.

**© ETSI 2025. All rights reserved.**

---

## Contents

- [Intellectual Property Rights](#intellectual-property-rights)
- [Foreword](#foreword)
- [Modal verbs terminology](#modal-verbs-terminology)
- [1 Scope](#1-scope)
- [2 References](#2-references)
- [3 Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations](#3-definition-of-terms-symbols-and-abbreviations)
- [4 Implementation of Electronic Attestation of Attributes Presentations](#4-implementation-of-electronic-attestation-of-attributes-presentations)
- [5 ISO/IEC 18013-5 proximity presentation flows](#5-isoiec-18013-5-proximity-presentation-flows)
- [6 Remote presentation flows](#6-remote-presentation-flows)
- [7 Security considerations](#7-security-considerations)
- [Annex A (normative): Transaction data for authorization](#annex-a-normative-transaction-data-for-authorization)
- [Annex B (informative): Change history](#annex-b-informative-change-history)
- [History](#history)

---

## Intellectual Property Rights

### Essential patents

IPRs essential or potentially essential to normative deliverables may have been declared to ETSI. The declarations pertaining to these essential IPRs, if any, are publicly available for ETSI members and non-members, and can be found in ETSI SR 000 314: "Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs); Essential, or potentially Essential, IPRs notified to ETSI in respect of ETSI standards", which is available from the ETSI Secretariat. Latest updates are available on the ETSI IPR online database.

Pursuant to the ETSI Directives including the ETSI IPR Policy, no investigation regarding the essentiality of IPRs, including IPR searches, has been carried out by ETSI. No guarantee can be given as to the existence of other IPRs not referenced in ETSI SR 000 314 (or the updates on the ETSI Web server) which are, or may be, or may become, essential to the present document.

### Trademarks

The present document may include trademarks and/or tradenames which are asserted and/or registered by their owners. ETSI claims no ownership of these except for any which are indicated as being the property of ETSI, and conveys no right to use or reproduce any trademark and/or tradename. Mention of those trademarks in the present document does not constitute an endorsement by ETSI of products, services or organizations associated with those trademarks.

DECT™, PLUGTESTS™, UMTS™ and the ETSI logo are trademarks of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members. 3GPP™, LTE™ and 5G™ logo are trademarks of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of the 3GPP Organizational Partners. oneM2M™ logo is a trademark of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of the oneM2M Partners. GSM® and the GSM logo are trademarks registered and owned by the GSM Association.

---

## Foreword

This Technical Specification (TS) has been produced by ETSI Technical Committee Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI).

The present document is part 2 of a multi-part deliverable. Full details of the entire series can be found in part 1 [5].

---

## Modal verbs terminology

In the present document "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "may", "need not", "will", "will not", "can" and "cannot" are to be interpreted as described in clause 3.2 of the ETSI Drafting Rules (Verbal forms for the expression of provisions).

"must" and "must not" are NOT allowed in ETSI deliverables except when used in direct citation.

---

## 1 Scope

The present document:

1. **Specifies three (3) realizations** for Presentations of Electronic Attestation of Attributes (EAAP hereinafter) built on the realizations of Electronic Attestation of Attributes (EAA hereinafter), specified in ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5] namely: SD-JWT VC EAAP, ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAP, and JSON-LD W3C VC EAAP.

   > **NOTE:** The realization X509-AC EAAP will be added in the next version of the present document.

2. **Specifies two (2) profiles** of protocols for allowing Relying Parties (RP hereinafter) to request to the EUDI Wallet EAAPs or Personal Identification Data (PID hereinafter), and the EUDI Wallet to send the requested EAAPs/PIDs to the RP. The profiles are built on the protocols defined in:
   - a) ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10].
   - b) OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], whose part dealing with presentation of credentials is in turn a profile of OpenID4 VP [7].

---

## 2 References

### 2.1 Normative references

References are either specific (identified by date of publication and/or edition number or version number) or non-specific. For specific references, only the cited version applies. For non-specific references, the latest version of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.

Referenced documents which are not found to be publicly available in the expected location might be found in the ETSI docbox.

> **NOTE:** While any hyperlinks included in this clause were valid at the time of publication, ETSI cannot guarantee their long-term validity.

The following referenced documents are necessary for the application of the present document.

| Ref | Document |
|-----|----------|
| [1] | W3C® Recommendation (15 May 2025): "Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0". |
| [2] | IETF SD-JWT draft-ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt-22: "Selective Disclosure for JWTs (SD-JWT)". May 2025; expires November 2025. |
| [3] | W3C® Recommendation (15 May 2025): "Securing Verifiable Credentials using JOSE and COSE". (W3C VC_JOSE_COSE). |
| [4] | IETF RFC 2397: "The 'data' URL scheme". August 1988. |
| [5] | ETSI TS 119 472-1: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); Profiles for Electronic Attestation of Attributes; Part 1: General requirements". |
| [6] | IETF RFC 9101: "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework: JWT-Secured Authorization Request (JAR)", August 2021. |
| [7] | OpenID4 VP: "OpenID for Verifiable Presentations 1.0". July 2025. |
| [8] | IETF RFC 7515: "JSON Web Signature (JWS)", May 2015. |
| [9] | IETF RFC 7516: "JSON Web Encryption (JWE)", May 2015. |
| [10] | ISO/IEC 18013-5: "Personal identification — ISO – compliant driving licence — Part 5: Mobile driving licence (mDL) application". |
| [11] | OpenID4VC-HAIP: "OpenID4VC High Assurance Interoperability Profile 1.0 - draft 04". 19 September 2025. |
| [12] | ETSI TS 119 612: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); Trusted Lists". |

### 2.2 Informative references

The following referenced documents may be useful in implementing an ETSI deliverable or add to the reader's understanding, but are not required for conformance to the present document.

| Ref | Document |
|-----|----------|
| [i.1] | ETSI TS 119 471: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); Policy and Security requirements for Providers of Electronic Attestation of Attributes Services". |
| [i.2] | ETSI TR 119 462: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); Wallet interfaces for trust services and signings". |
| [i.3] | Architecture and Reference Framework (ARF) version 2.4.0. |
| [i.4] | IETF RFC 8152: "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE)", July 2017. |
| [i.5] | ETSI TS 119 182: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); JAdES digital signatures; Part 1: Building blocks and JAdES baseline signatures". |
| [i.6] | ETSI TS 119 152-1: "Electronic Signatures and Trust Infrastructures (ESI); CB AdES (CBOR-AdES) digital signatures Part 1: Building blocks and CB-AdES baseline signatures". |

---

## 3 Definition of terms, symbols and abbreviations

### 3.1 Terms

For the purposes of the present document, the terms given in ETSI TS 119 471 [i.1], ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5], ETSI TR 119 462 [i.2], Architecture and Reference Framework (ARF) version 2.4.0 [i.3] and the following apply:

- **Electronic Attestation of Attributes Presentation (EAAP):** tampered-proof presentation of an electronic attestation of attributes built in such a way that the subject of the EAA presented can be trusted through a cryptographic verification

### 3.2 Symbols

Void.

### 3.3 Abbreviations

| Abbreviation | Meaning |
|--------------|---------|
| CBOR | Concise Binary Object Representation |
| COSE | CBOR Object Signing and Encryption |
| DCQL | Digital Credentials Query Language |
| DM | Data Model |
| EAA | Electronic Attestation of Attributes |
| EAAP | Electronic Attestation of Attributes Presentation |
| ECDH | Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman |
| ECDSA | Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm |
| EUDI | European Digital Identity |
| GEN | General |
| HAIP | High Assurance Interoperability Profile |
| HTTP | Hypertext Transfer Protocol |
| JOSE | JSON Object Signing and Encryption |
| JSON | JavaScript Object Notation |
| JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE | JSON-LD W3C Verifiable Credentials secured with JOSE |
| JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT | JSON-LD W3C Verifiable Credentials secured with SD-JWT |
| JSON-LD W3C VC | JSON-LD serialized W3C Verifiable Credentials |
| JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE | JSON-LD W3C Verifiable Presentations secured with JOSE |
| JWS | JSON Web Signature |
| JWT | JSON Web Token |
| KB | Key Binding |
| KB-JWT | Key Binding JSON Web Token |
| LD | Linked Data |
| mDL | mobile Driving Licence |
| OIDFVP | OpenID for Verifiable Presentations |
| PID | Personal Identification Data |
| REQ | Request |
| RO | Request Object |
| RP | Relying Party |
| SD | Selective Disclosure |
| SD-JWT VC | Selective Disclosure based JSON Web Token Verifiable Credentials |
| SD-JWT | Selective Disclosure based on JSON Web Token |
| SD-JWT+KB | SD-JWT with a Key Binding JWT |
| URI | Uniform Resource Identifier |
| URL | Uniform Resource Locator |
| VP | Verifiable Presentation |
| W3C VC DM | W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model |
| WU | Wallet Unit |
| X509-AC | X.509 Attribute Certificate |

---

## 4 Implementation of Electronic Attestation of Attributes Presentations

### 4.1 EAAP implementation based on SD-JWT VC

The present clause specifies a realization of EAAP for the SD-JWT VC EAA defined in clause 5 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

The EAAPs implemented according to the present clause will be designated as **SD-JWT VC EAAP** hereinafter.

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **EAAP-SD-JWT VC-01** | If the SD-JWT VC EAA contains the cnf claim, the corresponding SD-JWT VC EAAP shall be a SD-JWT+KB as specified IETF SD-JWT [2]. |
| **EAAP-SD-JWT VC-02** | If the SD-JWT VC EAA does not contain the cnf claim, the corresponding SD-JWT VC EAAP shall be a SD-JWT VC EAAP as specified in IETF SD-JWT [2]. |
| **EAAP-SD-JWT VC-03** | If the SD-JWT VC EAA does not contain the cnf claim, the EAA subject binding shall be ensured by other means (e.g. claims-base binding, biometric-base binding). |
| **EAAP-SD-JWT VC-04** | A SD-JWT VC EAAP shall be serialized using either the Compact Serialization, as specified in clause 5.2 of IETF SD-JWT [2], or the Flattened JSON Serialization, as specified in clause 8.2 of IETF SD-JWT [2]. |
| **EAAP-SD-JWT VC-05** | The Key Binding JSON Web Token (KB-JWT) of a SD-JWT VC EAAP (which is a SD-JWT+KB) shall be signed by the EAA subject. |

### 4.2 EAAP implementation based on ISO/IEC-mdoc

The present clause specifies a realization of EAAPs for the ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAs defined in clause 6 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

> **NOTE 1:** Clause 6 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5] defines different requirements for ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAs that are mobile driving licenses (mDL) and ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAs that are NOT mDLs in terms of data elements and their namespaces. See that document for more details.

The EAAPs implemented according to the present clause will be designated as **ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] EAAP** hereinafter.

ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] requires that the mdoc (the EUDI Wallet) builds an instance of type DeviceResponse in response to a correct instance of type DeviceRequest sent by the mdoc reader/verifier (a Relying Party). This instance of DeviceResponse type can contain the documents member, which is an array of instances of type Document. Each element in this array can contain an indication of error if the request of that element was not correctly built or any other problem has occurred during the processing of the request by the mdoc or during the generation of the corresponding document.

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **EAAP-ISO/IEC-mdoc-01** | Each element in the documents member of an instance of type DeviceResponse as defined in clause 10.3.3 of ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] that does not contain the errors member shall be an ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAP if the mentioned element does not contain the errors member. |
| **EAAP-ISO/IEC-mdoc-02** | The deviceAuth member of the deviceSigned member of the ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAP shall contain the deviceSignature child member. |

> **NOTE 2:** As each element in the documents member of an instance of type DeviceResponse is of type Document, an ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAP is an instance of type Document that does not contain the errors member.

### 4.3 EAAP implementation based on JSON-LD W3C VC DM

#### 4.3.1 Introduction

The present clause specifies requirements for generating EAAPs for the JSON-LD W3C VC EAA specified in clause 7 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

These EAAPs shall be generated as specified in W3C Recommendation (15 May 2025): "Securing Verifiable Credentials using JOSE and COSE" [3]. This W3C Recommendation defines how to secure JSON-LD W3C Verifiable Credentials and JSON-LD W3C Verifiable Presentations either with JWS (the W3C Recommendation uses JOSE), or with SD-JWT.

The EAAPs specified in clause 4.3.2 of the present document use JWS signatures as specified in IETF RFC 7515 [8], for generating EAAPs of both JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs and JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAAs. These EAAPs will be designated as **JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE EAAPs**.

#### 4.3.2 JOSE-signed JSON-LD W3C EAAPs for JSON-LD W3C EAAs

The present clause specifies requirements for generating presentations, signed by the EAA subject, of JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs specified in clause 7.6.4.2 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-01** | A JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAP shall meet the requirements defined in: clause 4.13 of "Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0" [1], clause 3.1.2 of W3C Recommendation (15 May 2025): "Securing Verifiable Credentials using JOSE and COSE" [3], and the requirements defined in the present clause. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-02** | A JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAP shall be a JWS signature generated by the EAA subject. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-03** | The payload of a JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAP shall be an object meeting the requirements defined in clause 4.13 of "Verifiable Credentials Data Model v2.0" [1]. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-04** | The payload of a JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAP shall have the verifiableCredential property. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-05** | Each element in the verifiableCredential array shall have the type, @context, and id properties. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-06** | The type property child of each element in the verifiableCredential array shall have the value EnvelopedVerifiableCredential. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-07** | The id property child of each element in the verifiableCredential array shall contain one or more data URIs as specified in IETF RFC 2397 [4]. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-08** | Each data URI within the id property shall be separated from the next one by the ';' character. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE-09** | If the URI encapsulates a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs then the media type of the id property shall be application/vc+jwt. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE-10** | If the URI encapsulates a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAAs then the media type of the id property shall be application/vc+sd-jwt. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-11** | All the signed JSON-LD W3C VC EAAs in the data part of the data URL of the id property shall use the same Serialization, either the Compact Serialization or the base64 encoding of the Flattened JSON. |
| **EAAP-JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE-12** | If all the signed JSON-LD W3C VC EAAs in the data part of the data URL of the id property are base64 encoding of the Flattened JSON Serialization mentioned before, the string ";base64," shall be inserted between the value of the media type and the data part. |

> **NOTE 1:** The verifiableCredential property is defined in clause 4.13 of [1] as an array. Each element of the verifiableCredential array encapsulates either a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs or a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAA as specified in clause 7 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

> **NOTE 2:** This value signals that each element in the verifiableCredential array contains signed JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs and/or JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAAs as specified in clause 7 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

> **NOTE 3:** These values declare that the data URL encapsulates a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs.

> **NOTE 4:** These values declare that the data URL encapsulates a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAAs.

> **NOTE 5:** As a consequence of the former requirements JSON-LD W3C VC EAAs using Compact Serialization and JSON-LD W3C VC EAAs using Flattened JSON Serialization, are placed in different elements of the verifiableCredential array.

> **NOTE 6:** Therefore, each object in the verifiableCredential array encapsulates a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC JOSE EAAs or a sequence of one or more JSON-LD W3C VC SD-JWT EAAs as specified in clause 7 of ETSI TS 119 472-1 [5].

### 4.4 EAAP implementation based on X.509 Attribute Certificates (X509-AC)

> **NOTE:** To be completed in later versions. A possible solution would be to use an enveloping JAdES signature, specified in ETSI TS 119 182 [i.5], with the srAttrs header parameter, enclosing the certified member containing an array of X.509 Attribute certificates. Also other solutions need to be investigated.

---

## 5 ISO/IEC 18013-5 proximity presentation flows

### 5.1 Introduction

Clause 5 and its subclauses define a profile for a EAAP response/request built on ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10].

### 5.2 General requirements

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-GEN-01** | The ephemeral key pair built during the device engagement phase shall be an ECDH-ES agreed elliptic curve key of type P-256. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-GEN-02** | This ephemeral key pair built during the device engagement phase shall use the ECDSA algorithm. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-GEN-03** | If the present document modifies a requirement in OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], the modified requirement defined by the present document shall prevail. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-GEN-04** | The EUDI Wallet and the Relying Parties message shall support the A128GCM algorithm and the A256GCM algorithm. |

> **NOTE:** This allows, for instance, that the present document converts in mandatory an optional requirement from OpenID4VC-HAIP [11] or extends mandatory requirements. Note that OpenID4VC-HAIP [11] also defines requirements for presenting ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAs.
>
> **EXAMPLE:** The present document extends the crypto suite required by OpenID4VC-HAIP [11].

### 5.3 ISO/IEC-mdoc proximity EAAP Request profile

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-01** | The RP shall send to the WU a DeviceRequest message as specified in ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] for requesting the presentation of one or more EAAs. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-02** | The docRequests array child member of DeviceRequest shall not be empty. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-03** | All the elements of the docRequests array shall contain the readerAuth member. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-04** | The digital signature implemented in the readerAuth shall be generated with the ECDSA algorithm using a P-256 elliptic curve. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-05** | The digital signature implemented in readerAuth shall be generated with the private key whose corresponding public key is enclosed within the RP access certificate. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-06** | The digital signature implemented in readerAuth shall include the x5chain parameter in the unprotected header. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-07** | The x5chain unprotected header parameter shall contain the RP access certificate in its first element, and its certificate path up to, but excluding, the trust anchor. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-08** | The instances of type ItemsRequest, encapsulated in the elements in the docRequests member, shall contain a non-empty requestInfo member (which is a CBOR map). |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-09** | The mentioned requestInfo member shall contain a member with label "euWrprc". |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-10** | The member with label "euWrprc" shall map the label "euWrprc" to a CBOR byte string. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-REQ-11** | The CBOR byte string mapped to the "euWrprc" label shall contain the serialization of the RP registration certificate. |

> **NOTE 1:** ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] defines readerAuth member as an instance of ReaderAuth type, which makes equal to COSE_Sign1 type defined in IETF RFC 8152 [i.4]. Therefore readerAuth is a digital signature.
>
> **NOTE 2:** ETSI TC ESI is currently developing ETSI TS 119 152-1 [i.6], a CBOR format for AdES signatures (CB-AdES). Once this document is published, ETSI TC ESI will reassess the suitability of requiring that these signatures are CB-AdES-B-B.
>
> **NOTE 3:** All the elements in the docRequests member are instances of type ItemsRequest encapsulated in a CBOR byte string (type ItemsRequestBytes).
>
> **NOTE 4:** This new member is required for incorporating the RP registration certificate(s), which are placed in an extension of the requestInfo.

### 5.4 ISO/IEC 18013-5 proximity EAAP Response profile

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-01** | In response to a DeviceRequest message sent by the RP, the WU shall generate a DeviceResponse message as specified in ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10]. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-02** | All the disclosed attested attributes shall be present in the issuerSigned member of the DeviceResponse message. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-03** | The deviceSigned member of the DeviceResponse message shall not contain any attested attribute. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-04** | The DeviceResponse message shall be encrypted with either the A128GCM algorithm or the A256GCM algorithm. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-05** | The deviceAuth child member of the deviceSigned shall contain the deviceSignature child member. |
| **ISO/IEC 18013-5-RESP-06** | The signature implemented in deviceSignature shall be generated with the private key of the EUDI Wallet user whose associated public key is present in the deviceKeyInfo member of the instance of type MobileSecurityObject present within the issuedSigned member of the DeviceResponse. |

> **NOTE 1:** Therefore, the deviceSigned member is devoted to contain transaction specific data.
>
> **NOTE 2:** This requirement extends the requirement specified by clause 5 of OpenID4VC-HAIP [11].
>
> **NOTE 3:** ISO/IEC 18013-5 [10] defines deviceSignature as an instance of type DeviceSignature, and makes DeviceSignature equal to COSE_Sign1.
>
> **NOTE 4:** This ensures that the EAAP is actually signed by the EAA subject with the private key owned by the EAA subject.

---

## 6 Remote presentation flows

### 6.1 Introduction

Clause 6 and its subclauses define a profile of a protocol that allows Relying Parties (RP hereinafter) to request to the EUDI Wallet EAAPs or Personal Identification Data (PID hereinafter), and the EUDI Wallet to send the requested EAAPs to the RP.

This protocol profile is built on OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], clause 5.1.

### 6.2 General requirements

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **GEN-REQ-01** | The EUDI Wallet shall implement the profile of the protocol defined in OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], clause 5.1. |
| **GEN-REQ-02** | The Relying Parties shall implement the profile of the protocol defined in OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], clause 5.1. |
| **GEN-REQ-03** | If the present document modifies a requirement in OpenID4VC-HAIP [11], the modified requirement defined by the present document shall prevail. |
| **GEN-REQ-04** | The EUDI Wallet and the Relying Parties message shall support the A128GCM algorithm and the A256GCM algorithm. |

> **NOTE 1:** The present document profiles and adds EUDI Wallet-specific requirements; new requirements are provided only where OpenID4VC-HAIP [11] is silent.
>
> **NOTE 2:** This allows, for instance, that the present document converts in mandatory an optional requirement from OpenID4VC-HAIP [11] or extends mandatory requirements.
>
> **EXAMPLE:** The present document extends the crypto suite required by OpenID4VC-HAIP [11].
>
> **NOTE 3:** OpenID4VC-HAIP [11] requires support to P-256 key type and ES256 algorithm to both the EUDI Wallet and the Relying Parties.

### 6.3 Authorization Request (EAAP request) profile

#### 6.3.1 Common requirements

##### 6.3.1.1 Introduction

Clause 6.3.1 and its subclauses define requirements that apply regardless of the EAA implementation (SD-JWT VC EAA, ISO/IEC-mdoc EAA, and JSON-LD W3C-VC EAA) whose presentation is requested.

##### 6.3.1.2 General requirements

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-01** | The WU shall support at least a custom URL scheme "eu-eaap://" for its authorization_endpoint. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-02** | The Authorization Request shall use the Client Identifier Prefix x509_hash. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-03** | The possible values for the format claim within the dcql_query shall be: "dc+sd-jwt", "mso_mdoc", "x509_attr", "jwt_vc_json", and "vp+jwt". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-04** | For requesting a SD-JWT VC EAAP as specified in clause 4.1 of the present document, the format claim shall have the value "dc+sd-jwt". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-05** | For requesting an ISO/IEC-mdoc EAAP as specified in clause 4.2 of the present document the format claim shall have the value "mso_mdoc". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-06** | For requesting a JWS-signed W3C VC EAAP not using JSON-LD, as specified in clause B.1.3.1 of OpenID4 VP [7], the format claim shall have the value "jwt_vc_json". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_GEN_REQ-07** | For requesting a JSON-LD W3C VP JOSE EAAP, as specified in clause 4.3 of the present document, the format claim shall have the value "vp+jwt". |

##### 6.3.1.3 Requirements for the Authorization Request message

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_AR_REQ-01** | The Authorization Request shall contain the request_uri parameter, and therefore shall not contain the Request Object (RO). |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_AR_REQ-02** | The Authorization Request shall contain the request_uri_method parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_AR_REQ-03** | The Authorization Request shall contain the client_id parameter. |

> **NOTE:** The Request Object is passed by reference to the WU.

##### 6.3.1.4 Requirements for the Request Object

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-01** | The RO shall be a JWT as specified in IETF RFC 9101 [6] signed with a JWS signature. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-02** | The RO JWT body shall contain the response_uri parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-03** | The RO JWT body shall contain the response_mode parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-04** | The value of the response_mode parameter shall be "direct_post.jwt". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-05** | If required, the verifier_info parameter shall be placed within the RO JWT body. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-06** | If the RP has a registration certificate, the verifier_info parameter shall be present within the RO JWT body. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-07** | The element in the verifier_info array enclosing the registration certificate shall be a JSON Object which shall not contain the credential_ids member. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-08** | The value of the format member of the element in the verifier_info array enclosing the registration certificate shall be: "registration_cert". |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-09** | The value of the data member of the element in the verifier_info array enclosing the registration certificate shall be the base64url encoding of the serialized RP registration certificate. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-10** | The RO JWT body shall contain the client_metadata parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-11** | The client_metadata parameter shall contain the jwks member. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-12** | The jwks member shall contain the kid and use parameters for identifying the key and the use of the identified key, respectively. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-13** | The kid parameters shall univocally identify one key. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-14** | The RO JWT body shall contain the nonce parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-15** | The RO JWT body shall contain the client_id parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-16** | The RO JWT body should contain the state parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-17** | The RO JWT body shall contain the dcql_query parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-18** | The Authority Key Identifier (aki)-based Trusted Authority Query(trusted_authorities) for DCQL shall use the ETSI trusted Lists mechanism as specified in ETSI TS 119 612 [12]. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-19** | The RO shall be signed by the RP using the private key whose corresponding public key is enclosed within the RP access certificate. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-20** | The JWS Protected Header of the JWS signature on the RO, shall incorporate the x5c header parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-21** | The x5c header parameter in the JWS Protected Header of the JWS signature on the RO shall contain the RP access certificate in its first element, and its certificate path up to, but excluding, the trust anchor. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-22** | The JWS Protected Header of the JWS signature on the RO shall incorporate the iat header parameter. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RO_REQ-23** | The RO JWT body shall contain the aud parameter. |

> **NOTE 1:** The value of the response_uri parameter is the URI where the WU returns the encrypted Authorization Response.
>
> **NOTE 2:** The WU returns the encrypted Authorization Response including the EAAP sending an HTTP POST Request. The response is encrypted using JWS.
>
> **NOTE 3:** Clause 6.2 specifies the key types and the algorithms for the present profile.

#### 6.3.2 Specific requirements when requesting ISO/IEC 18013-5 EAAP

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP-ISO/IEC_18013_5_REQ-01** | The requirements specified in OpenID4 VP [7], Appendix B.2, shall apply, unless stated otherwise by requirements in the present clause. |

#### 6.3.3 Specific requirements when requesting W3C VC EAAP

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP-W3C_VC_REQ-02** | The requirements specified in OpenID4 VP [7], Appendix B.1, shall apply. |

### 6.4 Authorization Response (EAAP response) profile

#### 6.4.1 Common requirements

| ID | Requirement |
|----|-------------|
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-01** | The WU shall encrypt the authorization response. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-02** | The authorization response shall include the vp_token parameter, as specified in clause 8 of OpenID4 VP [7]. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-03** | The vp_token parameter, shall contain one or more EAAPs. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-04** | The authorization response may include other parameters, as specified in clause 8.1 of OpenID4 VP [7]. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-05** | All the EAAPs included in the authorization response shall be signed by the EAA subject. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-06** | The authorization response shall be encrypted using IETF RFC 7516 [9] as specified in clause 8.3 of OpenID4 VP [7]. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-07** | The encrypted authorization response shall be sent via an HTTP POST request to the endpoint whose URI is the value of the parameter response_uri of the authorization request. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-08** | If the RP successfully process the EAAP returned in the authorization response, the RP shall respond to the wallet with an HTTP POST response with status code 200, Content-type parameter set to the value application/json, and a JSON Object in its body, which shall have the redirect_uri member. |
| **OIDFVP-HAIP_COMMON_RESP-09** | The value of the redirect_uri member of the JSON Object present in the HTTP POST response with status code 200 shall be an URI, where the wallet shall redirect the user agent. |

---

## 7 Security considerations

The security considerations in clause 14 of OpenID4 VP [7] apply.

---

## Annex A (normative): Transaction data for authorization

### A.1 Introduction

The present annex specifies transaction data for managing authorization of the EUDI Wallet user to a RP to either execute a payment (clause A.2) or to generate an electronic signature, Qualified Electronic Signature or Advanced Electronic Signature, for instance (clause A.3).

### A.2 Payment authorization

> **NOTE:** This will be completed in the next version.

### A.3 Electronic signature authorization

> **NOTE:** This will be completed in the next version.

---

## Annex B (informative): Change history

| Date | Version | Information about changes |
|------|---------|---------------------------|
| 29/7/2025 | 0.0.1 | First version July 2025. |
| 31/7/2025 | 0.0.2 | Added ISO/IEC 18013-5 proximity presentation flows. Added Annex A on Transaction Data for authorization (empty annex for the moment). Added requirements on transaction data to OpenID4VP authorization request profile. |
| 29/9/2025 | 0.0.3 | This version builds one of the protocols directly on HAIP without repeating its requirements (dropped requirements defined in HAIP). Implemented dispositions to comments raised to version v0.0.2. |
| 6/10/2025 | 0.0.4 | Final version for RC after dealing with all the comments raised to v0.0.3. |

---

## History

### Document history

| Version | Date | Event |
|---------|------|-------|
| V1.1.1 | December 2025 | Publication |
